[Ask Swami with Swami Sarvapriyananda | Mar 5th, 2023](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3rE9U4ty5vw)

 
[Music] Om shanti, shanti, shanti.
 
Om. Lead us from the unreal to the real. Lead us from darkness unto light. Lead us from death to immortality. Om. Peace, peace, peace. Darkness to light always works.
 
Good morning. Namaste, everybody, and welcome to this session of “Ask Swami.” We received mail from all over the world with questions, so we thought we could have this public forum online, where we can respond to at least a fraction of the questions. Our brave volunteers are deluged with mail from all over the world and they do a great job of selecting some of these questions. We also have a live audience, you, of course. There's an internet audience, also all over the world, people are tuning in for this. As usual, Diane has some questions for us.
 
Q1: Good morning. The first question is from Pradeep. Why do we need to search for the unchanging Self? Why do we need that? Why can't we simply live as the waker, dreamer, and deep sleeper? What should drive me to seek the fourth, which is the conscious self that remains unchanged through all these three states?
 
All right, so the question is referencing the Mandoki Upanishad, which is one of the foundational texts of advaita vedanta. The approach is very simple, it says “that our life, you know this life, which we think is our life, this is just part of it. We are, you are, the waking self. Here, you're the waker and this is your waking world. The life that we have, and we might think that this life, what else is there? Well, there's another part to it. When you fall asleep, what happens is that all this world disappears. This world of our waking, the bedroom, where you have fallen asleep, that disappears. The bed, even your body, disappears from your experience. In your experience, remember it's an inside out approach. What I mean by that, is that it was illustrate years ago in a talk given by Swami Atma Priyananda at the University of Calcutta. He was talking about the three states of waking, dreaming, deep sleep, and the witness Consciousness. And when it came to deep sleep, he said in deep sleep, there is no world, there is no body and there is no mind. One professor of Physiology couldn't take it anymore, he got up in exasperation and he said, “what do you mean there's no body?” I can see the fellowship snoring on his bed. Yes, that's from a third person perspective from outside. You see, but what is the experience of you, the one who is in sleep, so when we fall asleep the external world disappears. The physical body also is gone from our experience and even the waking self, I, who went to bed that also is erased. And then we have our dream world, a world which we later, after waking up, we know it is part of our dream but then it seems to be real. So, it's a dream world and we are in that with a dream body. I mean dream body not in that sense of a dream but a dream about what the body you would want in your dreams. It's like you are there in your own dreams and you are this person, that's the dreamer and the world of the dreaming and then there's a third part of our experience when even that stops external world. The waking world is gone. Dreams also stop, just blank nothingness. Deep sleep all three appear and disappear come and go to you whatever you are if the waking world and the waking body, mind come and go with the waking state. If the dream world and the dream body mind quote, unquote come and go with the dream state if the peculiar blankness of deep sleep comes and goes with the deep sleep state then what is the one underlying experiencer of all these, that's called the fourth. The fourth waker, dreamer, deep sleeper, and the fourth is described as pure Consciousness. Just awareness existence, awareness, and limitless. Why limitless? Because it's not limited by the waking, by the dreaming, by the deep sleep. They all come and go. The waker, dreamer and deep sleeper are limited by each other. They don't extend over to the other states so that way and it's said to be non-dual. Non-dual because from that perspective, the perspective of the fourth there is no second reality. It is that fourth alone which appears as the waker in the waking world as the dreamer and the dream world as the deep sleeper and the deep sleep, blankness, so they are not actually first, second, and third. There is only one reality. It's only with respect to the waker, dreamer, deep sleeper, that you call your real self, the fourth. Anyway, that's Mandukiya in a nutshell and that's what he's referring to why should we be interested in this um so-called “fourth”, our real self-pure Consciousness. Why not just be this person? Well, that's the basic question of spiritual life. I mean it's not just a Manduke question, why should I at all be interested in enlightenment? It's because when we are in this condition of that, I am this person and this is my life and that I am subject to all sorts of terrors and tribulations, all sorts of problems. I am open to suffering, being vulnerable either I'm suffering or potentially there's although there's a world of suffering waiting for me. I am this body which is born and aging and subject to pain and illness and eventually guaranteed death. To a little bit of a misbehavior from others we react helplessly to this world as the mind. So the mind and body are subject to a lot of unpleasantness and unhappiness and identified with that we suffer in this world. It's a fact of human suffering. This is what the Buddha identified as the primal existential problem suffering or at least dissatisfaction sometimes very intense suffering and if nothing else the low unhappy drone of existential angst at the background which is continuous. How do you overcome that all of it? How do you go beyond suffering? Attain fulfillment so that is the goal of spirituality in every tradition whatever the language you can speak, the language of Nirvana, liberation, salvation, whatever you call it, it's basically transcending the limitations and problems of The Human Condition. Every religion promises that so that's also the goal of the Mandukiya and he says, why should I not be satisfied as just this waking person because as this waking person you are subject to all the problems of life? And when you realize yourself as the force you transcend these problems. I'm using the word transcend. It's not that you will solve world poverty, or one's own you, know the cancer of the body, or in any kind of on my own relationship problem, financial problem, any such problem, will I solve it? No, but all those problems will be solved in one stroke by realizing they are all part of an appearance to you, the Consciousness. The one reality which is free of all these problems. It's like when you realize this a movie as a movie until we do not realize it as a movie and if we somehow feel trapped within the plot of the movie, we are subject to comedy. We may laugh at it then the next show is a tragedy and you will bound to weep and notice it's worse than that because when you laugh at a comedy or you know a tragedy, it's still an aesthetic experience for you because you know it's a movie but if you do not know and you think yourself to be a character in the movie then we you're trapped. So, the question boils down to why I should not continue to be part of the movie? You must realize that the movie is a movie. Will it stop the movie?  No, but then once you realize the movie is a movie you, you don't want to stop the movie also if you're fine with it, if there's a comedy movie then you can laugh. But if it’s tragedy, all right I'll enjoy quote and unquote the tragedy in the sense that aesthetic experience and I'll maybe weep with the characters in the tragedy, but I know it's a movie and if it shuts down. That's also natural occasionally there is no movie, that's a deep sleep, but I know I am the witness of all of these and in the movie at least you are a witness and there's a movie separate from you. Here the movie is playing on you, you the Consciousness in you the movie of the waking, the dreaming, and the deep sleep. There are only two states not even waking, dreaming, deep sleep. There are only two states appearing and not appearing. He calls them dreaming and sleeping. We got about the stake on that God, apart there's the commentator, the first commentator, and Shankaracharya’s gurus. Guru is a very radical non-dualist, he says, no they are not even three states waking, dreaming, deep sleep. There are two states we are either dreaming or sleeping, deep sleep, what's dreaming so-called waking is a dream, so-called dream, is a dream. Why? Because things appear to your things appear to you. You think this is a real waking state. It's just like a dream and the dream is a dream, so you have a dream state which is of two kinds. This one and the other dream which you sleep. I have in your sleep, and you have a deep sleep which you call sleeping with which is blankness, nothing appears to you just blankness. These are the only two states for the ignorant for those who are not enlightened for those who are enlightened they are the ones who are truly awake that by the way is the meaning of the word Buddha, the one who was awakened. They are the one who have truly awake. When you're truly awake then you are awake even when the dream is going on your awake even when the deep sleep is going on and you see in your nature as awareness. None of these worldly problems appear so all of this is just to say this you know straightforward answer is to take you beyond sufferings. Shankaracharya’s words in order to overcome to transcend all forms of misery and unhappiness. That's why we need to realize ourselves as not just this waker or the dreamer or the deep sleeper but the underlying one undivided Consciousness.
 
Q2: Let's take another question. This question is from Leonid. I am a 21-year-old from Ukraine. I read in the gospel of Sri Ramakrishna that God is a wish-fulfilling tree. I want to be a good sincere devotee who aspires only to Noble things from the spiritual point of view, but my heart is still largely turned toward the world. I want worldly success for myself and those close to me as well as peace in my country, Ukraine. Despite knowing that God can grant me all this if I intensely pray for it. I hesitate to do it because I feel a little immoral about it although, for the last couple of days I have started to spend several hours each day praying for the end of the war. If my passion is turned towards the world and I am not yet seized by a strong desire for Spiritual Awakening, is it okay to pray to God to satisfy my desires, reach my goals, and so on? Will it hurt my progress, or can it be used to an end after which I can outgrow this tendency and become wholeheartedly devoted to God?
 
All right, that's a very good question. She is just 21 years old you can see the sincerity in the writing and in such terrible circumstances in Ukraine. See, this speaks to the earlier question, also all these problems in the world at one level they will go on in one form or the other who would have thought at the beginning of the second decade of the 20th and 21st century. We are again faced with war around this time the first world war had just ended in the 20th century, 100 years ago, they were just coming out of the war. It had ended and they were coming out of pandemic so notice the nature of problems of suffering. It doesn't go away it changes. Vivekananda said it's like arthritis, you change it from one from the knees, it will go to the elbows, if you cure poverty you'll have the problems of prosperity and some form or the other suffering continues now, of course, one can ask God for an end to the war as she is praying for that definitely. And I've noticed that people here, you meet Russians and Ukrainians, and one interesting thing is that the one thing both want is an end to the war. Can one ask God for that certainly? Can one ask God for anything, that is for the welfare of the masses for large numbers of people and an end to general suffering? Could you ask for the end of the pandemic, end of the world? Yes, yes, we can. Any person with who has a noble like this idealistic young woman has a noble world view who wants good for everybody. You can pray, and one should pray for the good of the world. What about personal desires in this world? This question is I firmly believe if I pray to God my desires will be satisfied so should I pray for that and will I know those desires will not make me permanently happy, only spirituality will but I honestly don't desire spirituality wholeheartedly. Do I desire God wholeheartedly and I have no taste for the world I can't say that honestly so can I pray for fulfillment of my worldly desires, and will that eventually take me beyond worldly desires and I'll become like you know holy spiritual. The answer is yes and no. No because satisfaction of worldly desires does not take one beyond worldly desires. This is an ancient truth. We find this theme again and again in Indian literature spiritual texts literature also people who like the famous case of the King Yayati. There's one's case the story is like that who wanted to exhaust all desires by enjoying desires and what happened it just kept on increasing kept on proliferating. I remembered the first thing that we were taught in our economics class. The economics is the science you know which wants to match unlimited, human desires to limited resources, so can one satisfy these unlimited desires one cannot and if one tries to those desires just keep on the horizon of satisfaction keeps on receding? Okay, I just invented that and coined that. That's nice so the horizon of satisfaction just keeps on receding and that's what we find in life so it's best to understand that there is this pursuit of satisfying. One's disaster is not a path to either worldly satisfaction which is not which is impossible or it's not even a path to spirituality one must step back at some point. Now your question is but I don't honestly want to step back from the world to a part of you. That's why you're interested. Do we really want God? Honestly, not totally, but do we want to want God? Yes, we do. All of us do. Because of my past conditionings I still have worldly desires and cravings and at the same time I genuinely, honestly, I want to realize God. I want to love God. I want to become enlightened. I want self-knowledge in whichever language you put it, I really want that also. That's the human condition. That's the condition of most spiritual seekers now. What does Leonid do at this at this stage? You pray to God. Your prayer, you are reading the gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, you pray to Sri Ramakrishna to pray to God in whatever form you have devotion, faith in and pray for love of God devotion bhakti, pray for dispassion from worldliness from worldly desires, pray for focus of mind on spiritual you know on your meditation, on your stud, on your prayer, pray for these things which we find ourselves wanting in and so we can help some. Another thing, she said I'm convinced that if I pray these my desires will have satisfied her something like that, she said and the answer there is yes and no. Yes, all sincere prayers will be answered. I'll repeat that prayer is always answer but the answer may not always be what we expect it to be. We are praying for something, and we expect God to fulfill it, you know, like Amazon Prime. That God will deliver exactly what I want and do one day delivery. God is not bound to fulfill our desires as we wanted them to be fulfilled. It's like human. Kids may ask for anything from their parents and the parents may be able to grant at least some of it but it's not necessary that Mom or Dad will give you exactly what you want. They have a mind of their own and they are concerned about your welfare, so they'll give you what is possible and what's good for you and maybe they won't give you what is not good for you maybe they'll give you something instead of what you wanted. And that might be even better for you so yes, God always answers prayers, but the answer might not be exactly what we asked for. I remember when the pandemic started. I was at the Harvard Divinity School at that time and Harvard was one of the first universities where it was taken seriously. It is one of the epicenters. There was a conference in Boston where it spread one of the sources where it spread very fast. I still remember this was this class on prayer. Christian contemplative prayer by Professor Stephanie Paul and she said a couple of things. We were studying a Christian mystic work on mystical prayer and Saint Teresa is writing to the nuns under her care and the professor pointed out, notice how often she tells them to take care of their health and you might be a little puzzled why go on and on about you know be careful about your health. She explained to us you know in those days the medieval times people were often unhealthy. They were sick sometimes a lot of times there were a lot of these diseases going around that was just a few days before the pandemic hit so it's like in in contrast, we are fine we don't understand what's this unhealthiness this sickness. Why are they so worried about health and the next week literally the world began to shut down it's almost like God heard this discussion and he said oh really and then in the next week's class the professor she read out from a text from the from the Torah where it's a very interesting text. What does God do all day long, so God has a routine daily routine you know so there's a time when God reads the scriptures and God prays and God does administrative work like answers his emails stuff like that and it's like and something like that that is God sits on the chair of judgment for a few hours every day. And so there are very deep prayers there that we beseech thee now our heavenly father to have mercy upon us to not to sit on the on the terrible seat of judgment and to sit on your seat of Mercy. So that you know this was very evocative for all of us because it was just at the beginning it was recognized this is a pandemic and within 48 Hours the whole university shut down and the medical school, they were already engaged in trying to find a vaccine and although at that time they started and they were saying it will take I overheard conversations for the first time. I heard the term social distancing all those things came in right at that time so can we pray to God that do not that forgive us go easy on us don't sit on the terrible seat of judgment we know we deserve this but let us let us off easy runs off the hook. So yes, you can pray for all of humanity but for personal desires it's best that I acknowledge I have these desires, but I want to overcome them. I know they do not lead to any kind of deep satisfaction so I want to overcome them give me dispassion, give me love of God, give me this yearning for God, this is what one should pray for.
 
Q3. I am confused about the concept of avidya? If avidya is in Brahman and Brahman is the only reality, then avidia is also real then how is moti possible? Avidia means ignorance. The problem is in ignorance, we do not know our real nature. If we would know our real nature, we would be free of samsara, so the problem is ignorance. Now, if you say this ignorance is in Brahman in the Ultimate Reality because there's only that Ultimate Reality according to advaitha, only Brahman exists so if there is ignorance. You say there's ignorance it must be in Brahman and then the question was in that case that Brahman is the only reality and so this ignorance must be real. How can it be overcome? Well I mean this question can be fine-tuned. But I think we get the trend of this question, and the answer is, why does ignorance have to be something real that cannot be overcome? Ignorance can be overcome by knowledge, it's like if the movie is on the movie screen does that mean that the movies become real? The screen is real if you're reading a Harry Potter book, the book is real for you but what is printed is the fiction story which emerges out of that. That does not need be as real as the book so this idea of multiple layers of Truth and what are called ontological levels. There's an absolute reality and in that there can be a less than reality, the mind which dreams, our dream state, we have a dream but the mind which was dreaming is real and when we wake up, we say that “oh I was dreaming so whatever happened in the dream I dismiss as a part of the dream.” That was a dream that was not real, but I don't deny that I was dreaming exactly like that. If you go to the absolute level of reality, Brahman is the reality in which this entire universe appears and we do not know the reality, that's our current problem and knowledge will remove that not knowing and then we will know that we are that reality Brahman so that's not a problem at all. The second question was is avidya and maya are the interchangeable. Are they the same thing? Again, yes and no. We have ignorance, each of us we are ignorant of our real nature this is called avidya. Maya is the power of God of ishwara by which this entire universe is projected. Now what's the relationship between our individual ignorance and that Maya, it's a bit like Sri Ramakrishna gave the example of the poison in a Cobra. You know the Cobra has poisoned in its fangs or in its poison sac actually and a little bit of that poison is enough to knock out its prey a frog or a mouse but all the poison is in the Cobra and doesn't affect the Cobra at all in fact, it's the power of the cobra similarly, Maya is the power of God and this avidya which which is there in all of us which deludes us. Samsara is a part of that Maya is a tiny part of that of that Maya, it keeps us in delusion but you can also free us from delusion Maya has these two sides that which thing makes us think we are this body, we are this mind, we are this little person and this world is exactly what I want. I want to be rich, and I want to have fun. Some hope of you know transcending this condition finding out some deep fulfillment so that is that is also Maya but this is Vidya Maya the Maya of knowledge. Maya of enlightenment, both of them constitute this world. One keeps us engrossed in this world the other helps to free us from this world and both are part of Maya.
 
Q4. Hi, my name is Mihir. What is your view on Vedanta’s view on vegetarianism? From Vivekananda's answer, he said that vegetarianism is a higher truth if you want to be spiritual. It's better to be vegetarian than non-vegetarian however he made a point that especially for Hindus, he said religion has gone into your cooking pots, whether we shall eat with the left hand or the right hand and all sorts of things associated with food and eating and he says “if race has put for thousands of years, the best brains on thinking this through, it will lead to a race of imbeciles and that's what has bedeviled Hinduism for a long time, so he was very careful. If you look around the world people in most religions and spiritual people and practitioners non-vegetarian one might be surprised to know most of the Buddhists are non-vegetarian. The entire Tibetan because they have no vegetables. They are what the name to eat on the Tibetan plateau now does that make them less of Buddhists, not at all. What was the last meal that the Buddha had? Pork, he died and that killed him, but I remember I met this Buddhist monk and he asked me about this. The same question and I said we as monks we eat what is given to us in ashram generally that's the rule for monks though Hindu monks in general are strictly vegetarian so but is it in our ashram we have this rule that we eat what is given to us so for example we don't eat beef that's a cultural thing because we are Hindus so yeah so that's the answer is vegetarian better than non-vegetarianism? I would say without any reservation, yes, is it an important question again without any reservation.
 
Q5. My name is Matt. It's an honor to be here. I was at the Varanasi Rama Ramakrishna Mission, and I was talking to the President there. He was talking about love, and he was explaining me away towards God which was he explained to me that you could have you could imagine someone like your mother, and you feel that love that you have for your mother and so he described that as you have love and then the object of love in this case, my mother. That's what he told me of a meditative exercise where you use the image of your mother to evoke this love and then you remove um whatever it is that is your object of Love whether it's your mother or a close friend until you have pure love and then you can expand this love infinitely until there is pure Consciousness.
 
This was about a year ago and I haven't been as successful as I would like to with applying this and a lot of times, I struggle with this as soon as I remove whoever I am evoking love towards the feeling of love goes away and so I would love to hear your response to this. That’s’ a beautiful method actually and it connects to a very deep principle in vedanta. I can see a few things about it. First, a mother now, that's somebody we always hold dear from our childhood onwards, so for example the Tibetan Buddhists they have this exercise where they say we have been going through samsara for an indefinite period of time for our Millennia for many thousands of lifetimes. Let me see all right that's something that's sort of not normally accepted in the Indian milieu, so now one interesting consequence of that is we have all come across each other many times in past lives. The next step they say is very interesting is that then imagine then that these sentient beings whom you are interacting with in each of them in some lifetime was your mother and imagine the sacrifice that being went through giving birth to you, nurturing you, just giving her life for you and that's true not just of your mother but all beings where you're actually your mother. Not theoretically, they were actually your mother at some point. Now imagine the kind of feeling you would have to everybody that sort of unlimited debt and great gratitude one would have. Nice, that's a way of cultivating that loving kindness towards everybody so it's very similar to what you said but what and the Swami told you then goes one step deeper where it's that feeling which is important that feeling of expansion and that unmixed love for the other. Now, one way of instead of dropping the focus of your love your mother and then just holding onto the feeling, is make everybody your mother that might be a slightly easier way because that person evokes our love. If I drop the person, then the love seems to go away very quickly now instead of dropping the person can I sort of like a exercise meditative philosophical exercise? For example, see that person as everybody. So that's what they do one reason why it's not immediately easy it's a great method but it's not immediately easy is the flip side of it. See there's only this much of psychic energy that we have if I throw a great deal of it into the world which we most of us do, then it is actually very little left over for love of God or the love of everybody. In general, we have our energies flowing out in a hundred different streams into the world that's why this dispassion and passion for God they go together. It's literally the same thing, the passion for the world and passion for God do not go together so one must pull back from the world in as many ways as we can be neutral towards the world and then this accumulated emotion. This heart, it can be directed godward or towards all sentient beings which is what amounts to the same thing. Vivekananda said the only God I know, and worship is the sum total of all living souls.
 
Q6. My name is Asha. If I understand correctly the universe is like a dream that appears in pure Consciousness or pure awareness. So my question is can Consciousness change the dream or the laws of the universe? Does it have control over what is appearing or is the appearance like spontaneous like what we see in our dreams? Is it just something that's appearing to consciousness over which it has no volitional control in which case it seems that pure Consciousness is no longer omnipotent or all-powerful. I'm going to answer this first part of the question first because there's a lot involved there. So this universe all our life is like an appearance in pure Consciousness. What are you are pure consciousness like? The Manduka thing which we started off with you are this pure Consciousness in which the dream of your dreams appears, the dream of your waking appears, and no dreams at all (deep sleep) that also appears, and it keeps changing but you are this background. Consciousness like a movie screen or something. Does the pure consciousness have any volitional control over this dream there is. One must investigate a little deeper. It's like asking so if I identify myself as pure Consciousness and this life is a dream, can I craft a better life as pure consciousness? The answer would be again yes and no. Primarily because first of all when you say volition, I want to change the terms and conditions of this life, I didn't read the fine print when I was born that the terms and conditions apply now, I am going to I want to renegotiate all this. This is not working for me but that volition that desire is part of the mind is at the level. Remember my desire to change the terms and conditions of my life it disappears when I fall asleep, and I start dreaming something else. It disappears completely when I go into deep sleep but pure Consciousness continues so the volition of making this change or that change is not part of your real nature it appears as part of the dream as much as the project of a character. In a movie, it would be a person who wants to do something, achieve great things. Now you are the watcher of the movie. However, the heroes projected in the movie is not how you projected you, but if you identify with it and then you can enjoy the whole thing but it's not you projected it. That is the idea of God in advaita. Vedanta. The absolute reality pure Consciousness is one thing which let's just call it Brahman, and there is something called Ishwar or God, that the god of religion and vedanta accepts it that there is pure Consciousness with the power of Maya, which is called Ishwar. Which is in charge of creating maintaining and finally destroying this entire universe and again creating maintaining just like your own day goes through waking, dreaming, deep sleep, and again waking, dreaming, deep sleep, similarly on a cosmic scale.
There is a Consciousness which wakes up and then this universe is created and the whole workday is this universe and then that Cosmic Consciousness goes to bed and the whole universe disappears. Srishti’s creation or projection existence of this universe and then disappearance of this universe and again repeat and repeat and so on. All of those are appearances in pure consciousness but at the level of the appearance, there is someone, something in charge which is called the god of the universe. That's not the individual being, the universe doesn't run according to our rooms, almost nothing runs according to our whims. I love that when Professor Bryant, he said “What do you mean I am Brahman? God is in charge of running the universe. God controls the Universe. I can't even control my own bowel movements so there's this huge difference between the individual being and the cosmic being. Individual being, Jiva in Sanskrit, cosmic being is Shiva, it sort of rhymes nicely with Jiva and Shiva, Ishwara saguna Brahman. Brahman with attributes but beyond the individual and the cosmic is you. The basic awareness, the pure Consciousness, that's your real nature and that's also God's real nature. The pure Consciousness is unmoving is still peaceful. When I think the mind moves, I mean there are things happening in the mind. When I think, I imagine, I enjoy, I suffer, I wake, I dream, I fall asleep, all of this is mind not consciousness and it's lit up by you the Consciousness. You are your only job quote unquote it's not a job it's your very nature. It's shining this undiluted unaffected shining is our real nature. Brahman there it's always perfectly peaceful or peace itself in fact that's the name used in you are peace itself. There is a temporary peace and the rest and restlessness going on in this world of appearance.
 
Q7. Charlie Hamnet asks, “it appears the platonic notion of God as the Platonists understand it, is that of being impersonal, being idealistic monism. This ties into Karma being an impersonal process and similarly the idea of the absolute slash Brahman being an impersonal state, yet I quite like the idea of God being personable and bestowing Grace as in the Abrahamic tradition. I have heard that advice has a nuanced understanding of God, that God can be both personal and impersonal, or monistic and monotheistic at the same time. Please explain.
 
Yes, that's a very important point in advaita metaphysics. The nature of God. Somebody put it beautifully in an interview and this gentleman who is vedanta scholar and a devotee in the vedanta Society of Southern California. It's interviewed about what exactly is vedanta? How do you understand vedanta? And he said “how do I put it vedanta? Think of Buddhism with God. Which is a fun way of putting it. Another person wrote saying that she was into Buddhism and she moved from Christianity to Buddhism then she said she moved into vedanta afterwards. Why? Because she said I missed God. I missed the old karmajan in Buddhism. There’s no God, so can we have this impersonal philosophy with a personal God? You can. Vivekantha says impersonal in advaita vedanta does not mean the negation of personality. He says that he can have as many personalities as you want. There's a cosmic personality of God which is called saguna brahman. Brahman with attributes another name is ishwara, the Lord of all.  Then the incarnation of God and as many incarnations in Hinduism, not just one so multiple incarnation, you can have as many personalities as you like because it's that one impersonal Consciousness appearing as so many personalities. It can appear as the cosmic divine personality of God but that's there's only one of those. But it that too can appear in many ways, in many religions into many mystics across the world in different ways but it's one god. One cosmic god. To put it briefly and put precisely, what is the conception of God in Hinduism. It is impersonal personal impersonal as existence Consciousness Bliss, pure being, pure awareness. Pure not in the sense of in a nice and good pure in the sense of without any attributes, pure being is existence itself pure Consciousness, awareness itself, and Anand the Bliss, itself, this “itself” means fulfillment. Think of this as the three main questions of philosophy.  What is real? And the branch of philosophy which deals with that we used to be called metaphysics now is called ontology. Then the second, how do we know anything at all and the branch of philosophy which deals with that is epistemology. And third there was this whole group of fields um Aesthetics ethics all of that is now clubbed under the values you know so it's called axiology. So this covers broadly more or less all of philosophy. Ontology, epistemology, and axiology. There are three questions: what is real How do we know anything and what's good or beautiful? And now notice that three ways in which the absolute is described in vedanta. What is real? Existence itself, just being itself is the only reality that there is. How do we know anything consciousness? Chaitanya that being has this characteristic of being ever shining, not just a dark dead being but ever shining. So that shining itself makes knowledge possible and then that being itself is all fulfillment whatever we are trying to do in life reach for fulfillment through ethics, whatever is good, whatever is beautiful, is we are trying to reach that absolute reality. And that itself is all fulfillment Ananda, Bliss. So that's the impersonal conception of the Ultimate Reality in vedanta. But then there's a personal conception also that impersonal reality in association with the power of Maya and where does Maya enter the picture all that is a this enormous complication there but within association with the power of Maya is called God the personal God. And that personal God is also infinite and it can be expressed with infinite characteristics, the impersonal Brahman, no characteristics, no attribution. The personal God has many attributes all loving omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent, basically the powers we associate god with. All auspicious qualities in the language of ramanu jacharya endless, auspicious qualities, so that is the personal God and that personal God can be worshiped in many ways because it's of infinite attributes. You can worship as Vishnu as Shiva as Devi with human form non-human farm with no form, formless but with qualities. He mentioned the god in the abrahamic religions. God in the abrahamic religions is this personal God. The God Who is all-powerful all loving just in abrahamic traditions without any form. It's formless form and without form in Vedanta. Oh but you can say but Hinduism worships god with so many forms but when you go to the hymns and the mantras associated with god with form with Vishnu or Shiva, you'll always see the nirguna nirak are also mentioned, the formless God as formless. So formless with attributes with form and with attributes and with human form and human attributes also as the incarnations of God multiple incarnations of God. So these are the two ways in which God is understood in Hinduism with the impersonal personal.
 
Q8. This is from Laskowski from Poland. I did some research on the topic of panchakosha recently and also watched one of your lectures about it. I have one problem, it seems to me that the name Bliss to the fifth cover of Atman is misleading. It is also known as the causal body which is associated with the Deep Sleep state. It contains the seed of whatever happens in the remaining layers of being. It seems to me that this layer can contain negative Tendencies called samskaras. I tend to think that the atman can be in a less Blissful State, this would explain perfectly while why in dream sleep we can have nightmares. Is my reasoning right or have I made a mistake? I would be grateful for your help here.
 
So he is referring to the panchakosha, the five layers of the human personality or five layers of Personality. What are the five layers? The physical body, the vital body, the mental body, and the intellect body and the causal body. But notice they're all bodies. They are not you. We are embodied in these five, we think we are embodied only in this physical body. No, there are successively like Russian nesting dolls. So they are successively subtler and subtler layers of this being but you are none of them but you exist in and through them you appear or you manifest to you are here through them so these five.
 
 
Now the subtlest one, it is the called the ananda maya kosher, literally if you translate the blissful sheath. What does it correspond to? It's like our experience in deep sleep, now he says that but is it blissful. For two reasons he finds it difficult. One is we don't experience any Bliss in deep Sleep. It's just blank second. Don't we say that this is the causal not casual. Causal sheath that's where all the cause of the person the seeds of our personality are there including all the unpleasant stuff. It manifests so why do we call it the Blissful sheath? Is it right the answer is no, you've got it pretty right.
 
 
The only thing is it's called blissful not because you enjoy lots of positive pleasure there but it's free of all trouble the experience in deep sleep when we wake up from sleep, we say there was dreams and there was also a time when there was nothing. Basically, let me say I slept like a log and so on, these expressions are there in different languages across the world which correspond to deep sleep, and they all report a lack of any kind of trouble there. So, this complete trouble-free sleep, without any kind of what is called in Sanskrit “upadrava” the Mischief of this world. I always say the person who is dying in the ICU in the hospital, terrible problems in the world that means I was just about to die ever but just but that person when that person goes into deep sleep no problem at all.
 
That means these problems are always mediated. I'm not dismissing the problems, at the level of the world, at the level of the body but they're all mediated through the mind. When the mind shuts down, you the experiencing Consciousness which has no experience of these problems so the deep sleep state with which what is the deep sleep state. It is the shutdown condition of the mind, this waking dreaming, deep sleep, all of them they are all states of the mind not of Consciousness. Consciousness is only one state shining. So the deep sleep state is free of all problems and therefore it is called problem free in that sense, blissful.
 
I slept happily. I did not know anything. That was the report of deep sleep in that sense happily and we seek it. It's not just a blank state of nothingness. People take pills and you know they really miss deep sleep. If deep sleep is not there we are aware of it. I slept how was your sleep? Not too well and I slept lightly it was disturbed. I had dreams and you know sort of lightly slept that we miss deep sleep. Sleep scientists have reported that in as one ages the ability to sleep deeply also goes away. He points out that the deep sleep has the seeds of all the nasty things in our life which is also true. That's why one can have nightmares in dreams but in deep sleep itself, the nasty side of it, and the good side of it all are dormant, so the nasty side of it is not manifest in deep sleep therefore you don't feel so it's correct to call it the Blissful sheath. The only thing is we must remember it's not where like in the waking state or the dream state. If there is something nice going on, I feel I am enjoying this. I like this, that kind of feeling is not there in deep sleep because the sense of the “I” has gone. All particularities are erased there. That is a slate of uniform blankness although all the causes of the waking and dreaming are there, but in a dormant state. That's why it's all right to call it the blissful but you have to understand blissful in that sense only.
 
Q9. My name is Girish. You've talked about the parallels between advaita vedanta and madhyamika. I'm wondering about the concept of dependent origination. How does that map into advaithic concepts or paradigms?
 
I'll give you a short answer to it because it is a big question. I'm reminded of a similar question I had asked to the head of one of the four great orders of Tibetan monasticism. There is the gelukupa, which is headed by the Dalai Lama but there is the sakyapa, that is the kagyupa and there's a ningmapa, the nickname tradition. So the the sakya tradition their head, their main Monastery in India.
 
I went there and I met the head of the sakya lineage, at that time called the sakya prison, who has passed now. The next person is in charge now, but I met the earlier one and there was a long queue of people waiting to take his blessings. I was a newly minted Monk from the Ramakrishna order so I was in the queue and when my turn came up, this very powerfully built, big and tremendous charisma, you can see the power radiating of this person.
 
I went up to him and asked “what is the connection between what is the relationship between Brahman and shunya,The Emptiness and the purnnata of Vedanta? What is the relationship Brahman and emptiness? I said who I am and then I asked the question about bow down to him.
 
He looked at me and he smiled and he said “big question, no time.” But your question was more precise, how would something like dependent origination be worked into or what parallel would it have in advaita vedanta? So notice, according to nagarjuna dependent origination and sunyat are the same thing. In fact at the very beginning of the mullah, the original text nagarjuna, says what is called pratitis that is what we call emptiness. What is called dependent origination? The potentialization is very simple. The basic idea is this arising that arises, this not arising,that does not arise, now if you want Nirvana, this samsara is arising, clearly you want Nirvana freedom from this samsara you have to find out what arising makes the samsara arise if you can stop that from arising this will also not arise. Basically, that's the idea of dependent origination. And therefore, nagarjuna uses in two senses, this world of samsara is also shunya empty. We have to realize that and the ultimate reality is also empty. Shunya but in what sense the ultimate reality is empty? In what sense this samsar is empty? In what sense is this samsara empty? If you want to map it it maps onto the advaiti concept of Maya samsara.
 
Q10. My name is Honey. I'm here from London actually and I come from the Sufi tradition but I've been studying vedanta for about 10 years now so I'm a vedant and Sufi. My question relates to reincarnation because I see that the core teaching across all of the traditions matches, the non-duality is almost identical. This area feels like a distinct difference of opinion and the objection I hear is presented in kind of Aristotelian terms. If you're going from a causal potential state and become actualized, then you know the tree doesn't return to a seed state, so how is it possible to go from an actualized back to potential in order to see a cycle of reincarnation happen? Maybe you can also point me to which books or scripture or commentaries specifically go into reincarnation and more philosophical detail please, thank you. 
 
That's a good question. This marks a fundamental difference between the Indian tradition and the Abrahamic tradition. Now in Indian tradition, this Karma and reincarnation is common to all the Indian traditions. It's an interesting thing. The Buddhists and the Hindus do not agree on the fundamentals like the existence of God. Buddhists don't agree about the existence of God. Hindu say God exists, Buddhists don't agree about the Atman like there is an Eternal reality of the self-called the called the Atman. But this talk about anatman, no self and yet the Buddhists all the Buddhists and all the Hindus and all the Janinas and all the Sikhs they're all agreed on the fact that there is Karma and reincarnation. So you see how Karma leads to Incarnation that part is clear because if there is no previous existence then all this disparity cannot be explained. And if there is no future existence then all the Karma that we are doing and we have done in the past, where do the results go? So we must have existed earlier, we must exist in the future and especially if we do not the more serious metaphysical consequences like coming out of nothing and then either disappearing into nothing or coming out of nothing and existing eternally which also seems rather ridiculous. So you must have existed in some sense earlier, you must exist in some sense in the future. Notice all the Abrahamic religions say that you do exist after death. All of us do it otherwise religion doesn't make sense. All right, my personal way of reconciling these two is that, the Indian traditions have a wider view of it. If you take a big circle and if you take a tiny piece of it looks like a straight line birth to death, but if you step back it seems going around.  First, I'll take the tree example so from a seed comes a plant and a tree and then the tree dies. That tree is not actually continuing but it gives rise to seeds which continues in the form of new trees. They are not exactly the same tree this is what is called a type token difference in philosophy. The trees are all individual, they may be the same type the same DNA continuing. This seems to go against the Hindu view of reincarnation where something persists over lifetime. This is the same thing being reborn again and again and again but it matches quite well with the Buddhist idea of reincarnation. The Buddhist idea of reincarnation and the Hindu idea of reincarnation there is some difference the Buddhist idea for Incarnation is a process it's like a wave in a rope if you have a rope and you shake it and a wave propagates along the rope. It's not that the same thing is traveling down the rope at every point the rope is lifted and comes down so a certain impulse is transmitted across time and space and so that might be a better way of describing the Buddhist view of reincarnation. What is the Hindu view of reincarnation? The Atman remaining unchanged it is the subtle body the subtle body which is in vedanta it is the five layers which we talked about the pranayama Mano Maya beganamaya. These three are called the subtle body and then there's the causal body. The causal body and the subtle body persist from lifetime to lifetime. It's only the physical body which is destroyed so when the death comes. It's the death of the physical body the subtle body goes on to take up new bodies, so the subtle body is not destroyed when death comes. The subtle body carries the impressions of past lives, and this is what is reborn the Atman remains unchanged in whichever philosophy. In the philosophy of advaita vedanta, it's unchanged now. This is how they explain multiple lifetimes and then when Moksha Liberation is attained, the physical body will die of course, and the subtle body also stops propagating at the point of the death of the physical body so the difference between the death of an enlightened person death of a non-enlightened person is at the death of the physical body of the enlightened person. The body dies and the subtle body disappears back into nature speak about it. The unenlightened person the body dies but the subtle body goes on so a personality keeps on going from lifetime to lifetime so this is the idea now in non-duality however how this can be reconciled the Abrahamic idea and the Indian idea is that in non-duality Karma and reincarnation along with everything else is relegated to what is called the transactional or the lower truth. What is the importance of rebirth Karma in advaita vedanta? The answer is there are no importance at all. A very good explanation is Karma and reincarnation but it's only an explanation because you're asking a question. The question itself happens to be wrong so the explanation also does not hold much water. I'll give a little story anecdote and we'll stop it. There was this monk of our order in the Himalayas in Uttar Kashi. One time he had a bee in his bonnet about the Abrahamic idea of only one lifetime and the Indian idea of multiple lifetimes. Karma and rebirth in Hindi it's called rebirth which is true. This is true or that is true and the arguments in favor of this arguments, in favor of that until the monks in the cottage got bored of it all. Nobody was willing to listen to his arguments, so he decided to take his dialectic outside the cottage to the next school, which it was a school of a master who taught a very radical form of non-dualism. So our monk went to this teacher and he said “Swami here, are those who say there's only one lifetime and no multiple lifetimes? And here is our theories which say that there are this punar? So which is true? The Swami said “when there is no birth, there is no rebirth. Please read the manduke upanishad from the advaithic perspective.” Let alone multiple lifetimes, they say there is no multiple lifetime, so is it true that in the abrahamic religions have it right? There's one lifetime, they say there's not even one lifetime at all.  Are there multiple shows of the same movie or one show of the same movie? It doesn't matter, it’s a movie. If you see a movie, the Hero goes through these troubles and then finally wins and the movie comes to an end now, if you ask the question will the hero have to go through it all over again and again? Maybe not, but the real answer is not even once did the hero go through any of this, that's the answer. So, from a dualistic Hindu perspective, it's a very serious question and they will maintain rebirth, multiple lifetimes. Most Indian schools will maintain it very strongly and they have very good reasons to do so.
 
Q11. Hello, my name is Sajna. Yes, I come from a Christian tradition. Is there a concept in Hinduism about a personal God that can suffer?
 
Again, yes and no. A personal God who would suffer would have to be incarnated just like the Christian God. Jesus suffered and was that suffering real? Yes, it was real. In the same way we believe that Sri Ramakrishna is in incarnation. Did he suffer from cancer and die? Yes, so the pain that a human being would have for throat cancer and death is the same thing that the incarnation also undergoes. So God suffers with suffering with humanity that's why we can relate to God and yet the answer is no, because the incarnation whether Ramakrishna or Jesus, they show us a way to transcend suffering. We are limited and we are helpless in the jaws of suffering whereas the incarnation shows us yes, I suffer along with you and I feel every bit of the pain that you feel. But here is a way to transcend.
 
That's why the story I often tell, and one example famous example is when he is dying from throat cancer, his disciples Hari asks him, “Sir, how are you today?” He says it hurts the throat, the tumor in the throat and I can't eat and then Hari says to him but “sir, I see that you're in great bliss and Sri Ramakrishna strangely enough he laughs, and he says “oh the rascal has found me out. Which means here is the difference between the Incarnation and the non-incarnation. There is a level at which the Incarnation is aware of his divinity and that helps him to transcend suffering at the human level both are true. Both are true. It's not that the human level is a play. For a long period of time both in Hinduism and in Christianity, there were theories because there are people who cannot accept that God can suffer. Yeah, so there were theories that no Jesus actually did not suffer almost exactly like we have similar theories in Hinduism. For example, Jesus died on the cross was an illusory. Jesus the real Jesus who did not die on the cross now you can see how that both of that makes sense. The only thing that happened in Christianity was because the idea is that there must be one truth so any deviation from that truth must be false so these other theories were rejected as heretical these were heresies. They're powerful schools at one time. They rejected the heresy and purged out in Hinduism. What happens is everything continues parallelly that's wrong or this is wrong and that makes sense from an advaithik perspective because another perspective all these perspectives are more or less helpful to the realization of the truth. Some may be more helpful. Some people are less helpful so let them all say yes so, Sita what she actually imprisoned by Ravana or did she actually enter the fire on the command of the bishop Rama. So there's one theory which cannot bear the idea of Sita being imprisoned or entering into the fire so that was an illusory. You know, the real Sita was hiding in fire and illusory Sita was imprisoned by the demon king. You see, they are very similar in theory but what does it mean actually? Is there some grounding in truths? Yes, it is when Sri Ramakrishna says yes, I am actually suffering. He's not play acting that I am sick and it's painful. He's suffering as much as any cancer patient would suffer but when he's saying I'm beyond that suffering also I am actually in bliss also, and that's also true. That opens the door for us to see how in the midst of this material world without denying any of the materiality, without denying any science, one can also see there is the truth of spirituality which transcends.
 
Q12. This is a question from Andrew Gonzalez, which goes to the question of human suffering. If all is Brahman then what is so wrong with Maya? At the most absolute metaphysical, level one was Oneness with Brahman can be believed and even felt however there are many human emotions and sentiments which seem to me to have their own profundity as part of the human experience which don't have anything to do with Oneness with Brahman. The easiest example might be the experience of grief that can be categorized as sorrow which is not merely a source of suffering but also a source of inspiration. My concern is that understanding one with Brahman might flatten the texture of human experience even though the texts speak of going beyond sorrow might one realize Oneness with Brahman and thereby fully embrace every aspect of the human experience which makes up such a large portion of poetry and music all over the world.
 
Good question and good point to end today's discussion. The idea behind that question seems to be if you become enlightened if you feel you are limitless existence Consciousness and bliss? Would it be a little boring? Would everything come to an end? You're talking about the end of the cycle of birth and death. We end up the game of life as if that's a good thing. Wouldn't it be a boring thing? Wouldn't it be an awful thing? That's why he says it sort of tends to flatten things out. What about all the enormous variety of life the quest for science, the beauty of our art and even into a certain extent there's a deep poetic beauty, a sad beauty about the flow of human life. The urban flow of human affairs, you know in personal life, in life of the world. Wouldn't all that be flattened sort of erased in you know your one radiance or something shining forth and then sort of a kind of a blinding light where you lose sight of everything else so that seems to be the idea behind it.
 
No, don't worry. I'll tell you why. Always look at the lives of people you consider to be enlightened. Did they appear bold? Oh no, I've attained Nirvana. How boring I wish I hadn't. No, on this side of Nirvana on this side of Moksha, we are subject to excitement and and boredom. We are subject to that the pleasant and unpleasant, nice, and enthralling and boring and awful on that side of Nirvana. They are not that, they are perpetually excited they have a seem to have an unceasing supply of fulfillment and happiness not dependent on anything outside. They're not bored by anything outside nor are they unnecessarily excited by nothing outside in this world on the body and mind but they have a source which is unending. What is wrong with Maya nothing really as long as you know it's Maya. What's wrong with the movie when you realize it's a movie? Do you have to switch up the movie or just keep staring at the blank screen? That would be very boring. No, when you realize it's a movie you can you can watch the movie as long as you like when the movie is switched off, it's not an awful disaster, the most horrifying of movies, the greatest of tragedies, is not awful. That's also aesthetic enjoyment and so is comedies and pleasant movies, all of them the only thing that is wrong in this realm of Maya is not knowing the Maya nature of things and not knowing the ground reality. Not having God realization, not having Enlightenment, that's the only thing that's wrong. That's the only thing that's at the root of all suffering. There is a saying in Panchada, one of the texts of advaita vedanta which says we make the distinction between ishwara srishti and jivas rishti, the creation of God, not absolute reality just the god of religion. The creation of God and the creation of human beings, sentient beings and it says all this all suffering is actually due to the creation of our sentient beings. God's creation does not create suffering for anybody so after Enlightenment the enlightened beings, do they see this world or not? Or is it all erased, do you see this word if they arise. They will see forms in their ears, they will hear sounds, if they have skin, they will feel heat and cold pressure, warmth all of that. If they have a mind, they will think and a heart to feel all of that continues. They probably feel more deeply and more subtly than we do they may even suffer more than we do and enjoy more than we do, however they're also can transcend this all at a moment's notice because they see the reality beyond this. A transcendent reality where they're identified with that so for them, Maya this creation, it is a glory it is something amazing, and it's not something that has to be dismissed and gotten over with. Oh I can tell you this, what is this world from a vedantic perspective, so a monk Pranava Chaitanyapuri, he told me this, he is a traditional vedanta teacher from Banaras so he said, in the Gita the status of the world is like this, first of all it is here to be given up? Why? It is because it is suffering so the world is a place of suffering. The world is impermanent everything in the world is impermanent and not only that it's actually false it's like a mirage. It's an appearance and hence here to be given up that's the first status of the world. The next status it is Divya. It is divine once you have given up this worldly concern and step back from it you connect it to God then you see the manifestation of God in everything in this world so you see the Divinity reflected in this world in the bhagavad-gita in the first six chapters. It is dispassion for the world in the next six chapters and we are coming to that in our study of the bhagavad-gita, 10th chapter, Krishna will point out Divinity in the things in the world not that those objects are Divine but because they are connected. They are from the divinity. You see the Divinity reflected in this world that which is to be given up is now after giving up. You see the Divinity giving up means our worldly attachment to this world and then you see the Divinity in the things of the world, that's the second level of understanding the word same exact word and third level of understanding Brahma Swarupa, it is nothing other than Brahman itself so three levels here to be given up. Deeper understanding of the Divya is divine. You can see Divinity here and third it's not just Divine it is Brahman. Brahman alone, like the Rope appears as the snake it's not a word Brahman alone, non-dual, it's not the ultimate truth. It is not that Brahman created a word, it didn't ever was born of that absolute reality according from the Quran. Now the ultimate reality does not give birth. Nothing is born which is not born of anything nor does it give birth to anything and yet is here is this whole word. This is beyond causality. Ultimate reality is beyond causality there is no causal connection between this world and that ultimate reality, so the ultimate reality alone exists. Many people don't know this. This is the core truth talked about in the highest advaitha text in manduke and this is how the Quran begins. The first thing in the Quran is this, of course that's the non-dual interpretation.
 
All right, on that beautiful note let us end. (Music). Thank you.



